[MACHINE WHIRRING]
[GUNSHOTS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Our names are Rebecca
and Josh Tickell.
We're filmmakers,
and our specialty
is making films about
the environment.
In 2010, we made a movie called
"The Big Fix" about an oil
spill that happened
in Louisiana.
While filming that movie, I
was exposed to a toxic chemical
dispersant.
[COUGHING]
My health suffered
considerably, and I had
skin rashes and other problems.
Doctors said that I
may even have problems
conceiving or bearing children.
In spite of the
warnings, we decided
to try to have kids anyway.
Even knowing the risks didn't
make it any less devastating
when I had a miscarriage.
>> "My love, little person that
gets you as dad is really--"
Really?
>> Now she's looking at you.
>> Oh, she lifted her hand.
It's so adorable.
>> When we got pregnant
with our daughter,
the doctor said there
was a birth defect,
and there was a chance
she wouldn't make it.
I love you, Athena.
Miraculously, she was
born healthy and happy.
>> Hey, Ma.
Action.
>> But for two years, she
had chronic sicknesses.
And we were in and out of
hospitals almost constantly.
So we decided to look
at all of our options,
and nothing was off the table.
>> Call your doctor if
your depression worsens,
or if you have unusual changes
in behavior or thoughts
of suicide.
>> Symptoms of a serious
allergic reaction may include
itching, rash, or
difficulty breathing.
>> Tell your doctor if you get--
>> --worsening cough, chest
pain, shortness of breath,
diarrhea, severe stomach
pain, or tenderness.
>> The dichotomy between
alternative and traditional
medicine is a false one.
>> So first off, what we have
to talk about is what exactly is
CBD?
>> There are some natural
doctors out there who literally
claim they know everything.
So they're telling you
about vaccinations.
They're telling you about
everything that you should do.
I think you need
to be very cautious
as a consumer of health care.
There are medical
doctors out there
who offer some of this hocus--
I'll call it hocus-pocus.
>> Virtual dolphin therapy.
>> It's the most relaxing
experience you can ever have.
>> Snake massage therapy.
[GRUNT]
Urine therapy.
>> And the only thing I can
do is to drink my own pee.
>> Finally, a friend gave
us a copy of the book called
"Earthing."
The premise-- by
planting your bare feet
on the ground, your body
will begin to heal itself.
Could such a simple thing
help our daughter get better?
It sounded too easy.
We were skeptical.
And as it turns out, we
weren't the only ones.
>> Please welcome
Gwyneth Paltrow.
[APPLAUSE]
There are a couple
of things, and I've
written them down here.
For instance, tell
us about earthing.
What is earthing?
>> Oh, OK.
They say that we've lost
touch with being barefoot
in the Earth, and
that there's some type
of electromagnetic thing
that we're missing.
>> That is true.
>> So it's good to take
your shoes off and walk
in the grass.
>> OK.
>> I don't know what the
[BLEEP] we talk about.
[LAUGHTER]
>> So we decided to
consult the experts.
>> In simple terms, grounding
is literally putting your bare
feet on the ground.
When you do that, you're
in contact with the Earth,
and Mother Earth is
endowed with electrons.
And these electrons
are literally
absorbed through your feet.
It's like taking
handfuls of antioxidants,
but you're getting
it through the feet.
>> Grounding means connecting
to the Earth to support
the specific function of
the organs of your body.
It supports the body as a
whole, but it specifically
supports organ systems
down to the tissues
and the cellular function
of the entire body.
>> Grounding provides a steady--
we call it a ground plane.
It's like lying
naked on the Earth.
But where I come from, in the
winter, you can't do that.
All the systems in the body, all
of them that we've measured--
and we've measured just about
everything you can think of--
everything goes to balance, to
normal, when you're grounded.
>> The man who started
the grounding, a.k.a.,
earthing movement,
is Clint Ober.
Well, Clint, first of all, we're
super honored to have you here.
Your book has been
everywhere, and everyone
has been telling us about it.
It's kind of a phenomenon.
And it's also kind
of hard to believe.
I have to confess, when I
first heard about earthing,
I was super skeptical.
So is that a common reaction
that you get from people?
>> Yes.
And I was myself.
It took me 20 years to
dig this out of the dirt
and get it to the world.
And I questioned it all
the way because it just
didn't make sense.
>> And what is the main reaction
you get from people when they
get this information?
>> The response has been pretty
much a lot of skepticism,
because it sounds absurd.
How can I just take my shoes
off, put my feet on the ground,
and reduce inflammation?
Because the world has been
about everything from oatmeal
to blueberries to you name it.
It's one of those things
you can talk until you're
blue in the face, but
until you experience it,
you're not going to believe it.
But once you experience it,
then the biggest trouble you
have is trying to explain
it to somebody else.
So a lot of the
naysayers, like most
of the guys say, well,
if this were true,
I would have known about this.
I would've heard about this.
Somebody would
have told us this.
This can't be something brand
new that we don't know about.
And I just say, I'm sorry,
it is something new.
I mean, something--
we accidentally
disconnected from the
Earth, meaning for everybody
to be able to wear shoes.
Inexpensive shoes, that
was a real advancement.
But on the other hand,
nobody knew the consequence
for the side effects
of losing our ground,
losing our electrical
ground with the planet.
I grew up around Native American
people, primarily the Cheyenne
and the Crow.
My dad died when
I was quite young,
but I remember even
before he died,
we didn't have a lot of money
or a lot of material things.
But in the Native
American culture,
it was very interesting
that nobody owns anything.
You can't own land.
You can't own trees.
How can you own this?
And then there
was an event where
one of my friend's sister,
a little Indian girl had,
I believe it was scarlet fever.
She'd been to the doctors
and all that kind of stuff,
and she wasn't getting well.
And they brought her
home, and there was
nothing they could do for her.
Everybody was real
traumatized by it.
I remember one of the
elders, they dug a pit.
And put a little bit of
straw in it, whatever.
And they put her in the
ground, on the Earth.
Built a fire there and
just sat with her for days.
And then next thing we knew,
she was up, running around.
She was OK.
It was just awesome,
just totally awesome.
There are many things that
kind of stuck in my memory
as I got older,
and one of them was
I remember coming
home one day, and we
were going to go into one of the
kid's teepees with his parents.
And the mother said,
take your shoes off,
they'll make you sick.
Why she would say they
would make you sick,
I wouldn't have had
a clue at that time.
>> It turns out that today, we
Americans don't spend a whole
lot of time grounding.
That may have something to
do with our love of shoes.
Tell me about your relationship
with your feet and shoes.
>> Well--
>> I wear them.
>> Shoes?
I love shoes.
>> Oh my god.
>> It's more of an addiction.
>> Yeah.
>> Pretty much need
them for everything,
unless you want to stub
your toe everywhere.
>> It's like your shoes
kind of represent you.
How I feel anyway.
>> You got to get
the shoes first,
then that matches the outfit
that's going to go with it.
You can never just--
it's not clothes first,
then shoes later.
It's shoes first, then clothes.
>> Yeah.
>> That's my biggest thing.
I stub my toe every day.
>> How many pairs do
you think you have?
>> I think of Doc
Martens alone, I have 10.
>> Oh, god, no.
>> Maybe 10, but only a
few pairs that I like.
>> I'd say 50 or
60 pairs of shoes.
>> Have you guys ever
heard of grounding?
>> No.
What is that?
>> Do I know much
about grounding?
Yeah, I have two kids.
I ground them all the time.
>> Grounding?
>> Oh, it's like, um--
spiritually--
>> Connecting?
>> Becoming more grounded
and connected to the Earth.
>> There are some people who
think that walking barefoot
could bring some
health benefits.
What do you think of that?
>> Uh, I agree but disagree.
>> I'm not.
That's a load of baloney.
No, no.
>> When you go barefoot,
and you touch the warm sand,
or you go to the ocean,
it just feels better.
Your body feels more
calm or something.
>> I think the benefit, if
we could, would give me,
me personally, more a
connection to my life,
to all the life around
me, you know what I mean?
>> Now that you
think of it, I mean,
when I go barefoot maybe
at the house or something,
it feels nice.
>> Maybe that's this
thing that we have,
is things that we don't
even recognize, like shoes,
in the first place.
>> Do you feel like more
people could benefit from being
grounded?
>> Oh, for sure.
Absolutely.
It's healthy.
It's natural.
>> I actually got yelled at
a lot by my parents because I
would try to go barefoot
everywhere, even in the snow.
>> Barefoot's, like-- for me,
I just don't feel comfortable,
I guess you can say.
I don't know.
It's just not really my trend.
>> Oh, I went through a mall
barefoot because my shoe broke.
>> Yeah.
>> He loves to try to
sleep with the shoes on.
Like, shoes off the bed.
>> What helps you get grounded?
>> Good shoes.
[LAUGH]
>> But shoes haven't always been
such a big part of our culture.
>> OK.
What's the deal with these?
>> Well.
>> America makes
synthetic rubber.
This kind, one of two principal
types, is called Buna-N.
Mix the chemical
thoroughly and--
>> In 1960, we invented
synthetic materials.
The first thing
we did was we put
rubber sole, or synthetic
soles, on the shoes.
>> Come on, boys and
girls, and follow me.
I'm Swifty Flyer.
I jump 10 feet in my PF Flyers--
the shoes that winners choose.
>> A big event happened, and
I call it the Nike generation,
the Adidas generation, the
tennis shoes generation.
We started wearing sneakers.
95% of people walk
insulated on the Earth.
>> It's the most common sense
thing that we are organisms
that live, and grow, and depend
entirely on the Earth while
we're alive.
And yet, we have completely
isolated ourself from it.
We're so disconnected that it
becomes this weird thing if we
actually slip our shoes off.
>> You've heard it before,
celebrities are just like us.
Or are they?
Elle Fanning did
something the other day
that probably a lot
of you may not do.
The 18-year-old actress landed
at LAX airport late one night,
looked pretty comfortable.
But it was what she
wasn't wearing that was
getting people's attention.
She walked barefoot
throughout the airport.
>> This was the single thing
that happened that probably
caused the proliferation of
inflammation-related health
disorders, far and
above anything else.
>> Whoo.
>> This is the most destructive
invention that man ever made--
the synthetic sole shoe.
>> This is so incredible.
This is Nobel Prize material.
>> Basically, what we're
trying to demonstrate,
what we're going to
demonstrate here,
is to show that when you
stand barefoot on the Earth,
and you touch the Earth,
that your body is conductive.
And what this is is
basically a continuity meter.
So what I'm going to do is
plug it into the Earth like so.
And I'm going to
put my hand on it.
And you can see here, my
finger on the back of it,
you can see that the
light turns green,
and that means
that I'm grounded.
To illustrate this, Sam here is
wearing a pair of tennis shoes.
And when he puts it
on, he turns it on,
you can see that
he's not grounded.
But because I am grounded,
I am barefoot on the Earth,
when I touch Sam, he
is naturally grounded.
[STATIC]
>> December 7, 19--
>> Like many great discoveries,
Clint Ober stumbled onto
grounding as a result of an
unusual sequence of events.
>> I got involved in the cable
industry in the early '60s.
I first learned the need
to ground cable signals
as we were developing
the industry.
When you run a wire
into the house,
before you can go
you have to ground the cable.
Grounding is to maintain
the entire system
in a stable electrical
environment.
You have miles of wire
hanging up there in the air.
If there's lightning in the air,
it's going to hit the cable.
And so what you want
to do is create a path
to ground for the
lightning so that it
doesn't enter the house, or blow
up the TV, or create a fire.
So any electrical event is
maintained at Earth potential,
automatically equalized with
the Earth and eliminated,
neutralized.
>> Clint had a background
in the cable TV industry,
and he knew that cables that
come to your home with TV
programs have to be grounded.
If they're not, two
things can happen.
You get snow on the screen.
The picture is terrible.
And the other is you get a knock
on the door from the Federal
Communications Commission
because the signal is
disturbing aircraft
communication.
It leaks into the environment.
>> Just as ungrounded
signals wreak havoc on radio
communications, there's growing
concern that because we are not
grounded, we absorb tremendous
amounts of electromagnetic
radiation from our
modern devices.
EMF stands for
electromagnetic field.
>> We are all immersed in
electromagnetic fields,
from Wi-Fi, from the
wiring in our homes,
and it disturbs our
electrical balance.
We get charged
inside of our bodies.
We get electrically charged.
Some people have as much as
20 volts on their bodies,
and that's not good for you.
>> But in our natural state,
the Earth has a built-in system
to ground our bodies.
>> Unbeknownst to us, we
live inside a battery.
The surface of the Earth
is charged negatively.
And the ionosphere, which
is a layer of the atmosphere
about 60 miles up, which
is ionized by the sun,
meaning that the
rays of the sun are
so strong that they split
the molecules in two--
a positive charge and
a negative charge.
>> The sun spews out electrons.
They come to the Earth.
They hit the ionosphere.
They charge the ionosphere.
And periodically, the ionosphere
releases lots of electrons.
It's called lightning.
[THUNDERCLAP]
>> The negative charge are
transferred to the surface
of the Earth through
lightning mainly,
and the positive charge
stay 60 miles up.
>> The surface of the Earth
is electrically conductive.
And wherever you are,
standing barefoot on the Earth
or connected to the Earth,
you are collecting electrons
that came from the sun.
>> The problem arise when we
don't have negative charge.
We need grounding just as we
need air and we need sunshine.
>> So the TV industry, Clint, he
had to make sure all the cables
were very well grounded.
And then he started to wonder
if people need to be grounded.
>> And what I saw with cable
TV was it was bigger than
Billings, Montana.
The world was bigger
than where I lived.
I ended up in Denver,
Colorado, working
for Tele-Communications,
Inc. One day,
I was home with my children.
And I had bought them computers.
We could do checkbooks
and play games.
That was all we could
do with them back then.
It just dawned on me.
I said, that's a TV
set without a signal.
So I had this brainstorm,
and I thought, well,
let's go get all these wire
services together and put them
into a unified data stream,
feed them over the satellite
and down the cable system,
feed them into a computer.
The main thing that happened
at that time that was probably
very significant for the
cable industry was we
created the first cable modem.
It had changed the world
in a day, in a moment.
I was living in
5,000-square-foot, A-frame,
log cabin on the top of
a mountain in Evergreen,
Colorado.
I was 49 years old, playing
king of the mountain, and I won.
I had everything
you could imagine--
cars, home in Breckenridge,
skiing, most of all,
I had a lot of art.
I probably had--
I hate to say it-- but a quarter
million dollars' worth of art
hanging in my bathroom
over the commode.
Because there was no
place else to hang things.
About 1994, '95, I was attending
a lot of Christmas parties,
and I got sick.
One Sunday, I couldn't
get out of bed,
and I was turning yellow.
My eyes were yellow.
Everything was yellow.
And so they took me
to an emergency room.
They couldn't figure
out what was wrong,
but I was losing everything.
My liver was shutting down.
I was only 49 at the time.
And they said, you need
to think about getting
your house in order,
because you're
young enough to get a new liver,
but you may not have time.
I was on every IV, every
type of antibiotic you
can probably inject
into a person.
And they said that
they had a surgeon that
wanted to experiment and see
if there was a way they could
go in and cut out all the
liver that had been damaged,
which was the majority of it.
I agreed to that because
I really had no option.
I remember, I was in surgery.
I thought that was the
last time I would see--
And I woke up a few
days later in ICU.
And I remember my secretary
was right here in my face.
My first thought was, I
didn't know that you had died.
The pain started
coming on, then I
realized that I was still here.
It took about a year for
my energy to recover.
One morning, I woke up, and
I looked out the window,
and I noticed that everything
was more energetic.
The sky was vibrant.
Everything was vibrant.
I thought it was
leftover from drugs.
I didn't know.
But I looked around the
room that I was laying in,
and I said to
myself that this is
all crazy, this house,
everything is crazy,
because I almost died.
All I had ever done was
collect these things,
and I spent my life
taking care of them.
I didn't own any of this stuff
because when I die, I go away.
They really owned me.
They owned my soul.
I went through this
feeling that I just
had to get rid of everything,
push everything away from me,
anything that was material,
even though I loved it,
and I spent my life collecting
it and taking care of it.
I had to push it away.
So I called my
children, and I said,
I want you to come and take
whatever there is in this house
that you want.
One of them called
the doc and said,
there's something
wrong with my dad.
He needs to see a psychologist.
And I remember seeing
the psychologist.
There's nothing wrong with me.
I have to do this.
After disposing, and giving,
and getting rid of everything,
I decided I wanted
to change my life.
And I bought an RV, and
I went on a road trip.
And I ended up in
Sedona, Arizona.
One day, I was
sitting at a computer,
and the computer kept crashing.
I knew it was
static electricity,
so I put a piece of tape
across my desk and grounded it.
Then I realized in that
process that the outlet wasn't
grounded, so I fixed it
so that I could get rid
of the static electricity.
I didn't think
too much about it.
I walked outdoors,
and I sat on a bench.
And this tour bus
pulled up, and it
looked like they had just been
to one of these outlet malls.
And white Nike
shoes were on sale.
It just dawned on me.
I asked the question,
I said, I wonder
if it's possible that humans are
no longer naturally grounded.
I wonder if these shoes
could be interfering with us.
So that night, I went
to the hardware store,
and I bought a roll
of metal duct tape.
And I just taped
it across the bed.
I threw a wire out the window
and had a ground rod outside.
I connected to the
ground on one side
and connected to
the metal duct tape
that I had laid on the bed.
So when I laid down
on the duct tape,
I was like grounded because
it was connected to the Earth.
And I woke up the
next morning, and I
thought, holy cow, there's
something going on here because
normally, for me to go to
sleep, I had to take Advil.
So I tried to find
out what I could.
The internet was
hardly anything.
This is back in '99.
I went down to
University of Arizona,
into one of their
medical libraries,
and there was nothing.
And in fact, I even tried to
find the cause of chronic pain.
The cause of MS was unknown.
The cause of arthritis unknown.
They didn't know.
Nobody knew.
So I thought, well,
I'll go out to LA.
I'll go to UCLA and ask them.
They pretty much
laughed me off campus.
They said you expect us
to believe that somebody's
going to put a
nail in the ground,
tie a wire around
somebody's toe,
and it's going to make
them sleep better?
They said, get out of here.
Go away.
You're nuts.
So I ended up having to
put together my own study.
I found an anesthesiologist
in San Diego.
And he says, I
don't think there's
anything to what you're doing.
This has got to be
an anomaly here.
But I'll entertain you.
He says, I will prove
that you're wrong.
And we grounded 60 people.
And the reports that came
in were unbelievable.
TMJ disappeared.
PMS disappeared.
Inflammation, reduced pain,
everybody slept better.
It's the first study that I did
that was a legitimate study,
where we had quantifiable data.
When they saw the
study, everybody
said, wow, this is really
pretty interesting.
And we ended up attracting
scientists, physicists.
>> Like any important discovery,
nobody was interested.
They thought he was crazy.
Now, there are a lot of
scientists who are interested.
Researchers, MDs,
MD-PhDs, PhDs like me.
I'm very interested in
biological questions.
Earthing brings up some really
profound biological questions.
>> While these grounding
studies were positive,
what was groundling actually
doing inside the human body?
The answer may surprise you.
>> Stephen Sinatra, who is a
cardiologist from back East,
was attending a convention.
And we sat down with
Stephen and told him
the story of what I was doing.
And he said, well, if you're
affecting pain, he says,
you need to be
researching inflammation.
You don't have arthritis.
You don't have cancer.
You don't have all
these health disorders.
What you have is
chronic inflammation.
To me at the time, inflammation
was you sprain an ankle,
and it balloons up, and gets
red and sore, and it's inflamed.
And he says, no.
He says, inflammation
is different than that.
>> We have so much
inflammation in the body,
and it comes out in illnesses.
We go to a doctor with all these
complaints, but a lot of it
is silent inflammation,
including my specialty-- heart
disease.
Heart disease is an
inflammatory process.
So how do we reduce
inflammation?
>> The most abundant protein
in the body is collagen.
It's the building
block of our tissues.
And we have gazillions
of collagen molecules
in our bodies.
They are all embedded in a gel.
This gel has a
huge surface area,
and it absorbs electrons
and releases them
when you have an injury.
>> Inflammation is
produced by neutrophils,
which is a white blood cell.
You have an injury, you
have a damaged cell.
And so these white
blood cells come over,
and they encapsulate
the damaged cell,
and they release reactive oxygen
species, which rip electrons
from the damaged cell, and
that destroys the damaged cell.
>> White blood cells release
free radicals at the injury
site.
They chew up any pathogens,
bacteria, or dead cells.
They clear the area.
It's called the repair field.
It's the place that
needs to be repaired.
Without earthing, some
of the free radicals
that are released
into the repair field
leak into the
surrounding tissue.
>> If there's not enough free
electrons there to reduce
the remaining radicals, they're
going to steal an electron from
a healthy cell, and in
the process, damage it.
Then the message goes
out to the immune system,
and another neutrophil does
the same thing-- eliminates
that cell.
And then you end up
with a chain reaction.
>> And this can create
chronic inflammation,
silent inflammation.
You may not even
know it's there.
And it continues for years.
>> If inflammation is the cause
of all these health disorders,
then I know that not enough
grounding is the cause
of inflammation.
Because if the body is grounded,
you can't have inflammation.
>> The initial grounding
studies showed promise.
But there was still
a big question.
Was grounding really
achieving these results
in the human body, or
was it something else?
A placebo effect of some kind.
>> I am Senior Research Medical
Scientist at North American
Science Associates.
I spent about 10 years working
in the environmental area, five
of those at the Environmental
Protection Agency.
And in 1980, I started
working at the Food and Drug
Administration, where I led
a team of biostatisticians,
and we reviewed clinical
trials for new medical devices.
I would guess that
approximately 10%
of the medical devices that
FDA sees from inception
would end up getting approval
at the end of the day.
So I would review
them very critically.
A couple of years ago,
my 92-year-old mother
was suffering from
peripheral artery disease,
and that would require
them to do an intervention.
They would go in and have to
clean out her femoral artery,
put in a balloon or stent.
They usually have to go in
every six or nine months
to clean out the artery.
And I felt at that age, they
couldn't keep doing this.
I tried most everything.
And I was looking around, and
I saw this thing on earthing,
that earthing might be helpful
for peripheral artery disease.
And I said, well, it's
not going to hurt her.
I don't think it
will really help her.
So I purchased her
an earthing sheet
and had her sleep
on it for one night.
She was also having
trouble hitting a forehand,
and this is a lady who
played tennis for 70 years.
And she just couldn't
remember how to hit it.
Next day, she had no trouble.
So I said, there's
definitely something here.
In all my years in the
medical device field,
I had never seen any
responses like this
for any device or any drug.
She's now 94.
We play tennis five
or six times a week.
She leads a fully active
life, cleans her house,
does pretty much
everything for herself.
And we attribute
this to the earthing.
>> It's done a great deal.
I was having problems
with my legs.
And it was hard for me to walk.
And I was quite
certain I would never
be able to play tennis
and do other things that I
wanted to do.
And it improved greatly.
And I went back
to playing tennis.
Not as good as before,
but pretty good anyway.
It just changed my life.
I didn't have the
worries that I had
before that something
bad might happen
if I kept trying to do things.
I should just go ahead
and try everything.
>> This is the biggest
development I've seen
in the medical field in my
five decades in public health,
and my three decades in
the clinical trial field
and medical devices.
I just have a hard
time believing
this is a placebo effect.
>> You need
electrons for energy.
It's called the
electron transport chain
in mitochondria.
It generates adenosine
triphosphate, or ATP.
It's the energy
molecule in the body.
I tell athletes that
before an event,
stand 15 minutes in your
bare feet on the grass,
and you will charge up
your electron stores.
And should you fall down--
and athletes fall down--
you will not have
inflammation at all.
>> If you think about the
last time you were barefoot
in nature, it probably
wasn't very recently.
>> Can you walk us through it?
Let's earth.
>> Yeah.
>> Let's do it.
>> Take the shoes off.
Take the shoes off.
>> I first learned about
grounding maybe 12,
13 years ago through one of the
trainers for the Tour de France
team from the US.
And he was using it with
many of their athletes
and with surprising results.
And I think that "surprising"
best summarizes my response
to it, because it didn't
seem to make sense.
I think I became
a believer once I
started to explore the science.
ATP is short for
adenosine triphosphate.
It's the energy
currency of the cell.
We're bioelectrical beings.
That's the currency
of our bodies.
That's how it works.
That's how we run our biological
systems, is by generating
this electrical energy
that's transferred.
And when we connect to the Earth
through a conductive surface
in some way, there's a
transfer of electrons
that slowly go into our body.
>> We tried to figure out how
much charge the body takes
in when you touch the Earth.
What happens is the body
saturates with electrons
practically instantaneously.
It's so fast that
you can't measure it.
Electrons from the Earth
enter the body right away,
and they coat the
red blood cells
so that the cells
repel each other,
and then they can't clump, and
the blood viscosity goes down.
It's easier for the
heart to pump the blood.
The blood pressure goes down.
All kinds of cardiovascular
issues, they go away.
>> In situations where we are
insulating ourselves from this
surplus of electrons
into our body,
we're going to get
the absolute opposite.
So instead of having low
levels of inflammation
and a thin blood, we'll
have thick blood that's
more likely to clot, and
our levels of inflammation
tend to increase.
>> And I'm just thinking
on the way here,
I was thinking about how maybe
the thinning of the blood is
the reason that all the
physiological systems go
into balance.
>> Of all the grounding
studies, the one that really got
our attention is called
"Electric Grounding Improves
Vagal Tone in Preterm Infants."
In the study, 26 premature
babies in an NICU
were connected to
grounding wires.
The heart rates of the
grounded infants stabilized.
And their vagal tone, a critical
measure of infant health,
increased by 67% with grounding.
>> So there are two things.
There are the electrons
from the Earth,
and there's the electrical
rhythms of the Earth.
And that's very important for
setting our biological clocks.
>> For thousands of years,
spiritual masters have taught
the benefits of meditation
and sitting on the Earth.
That's why some people believe
that earthing and meditation go
hand-in-hand.
>> The world is constantly--
every situation, every event,
every relationship--
is really a reflection
of yourself.
>> OK.
I would like if--
you agreed to it earlier--
>> Sure.
>> Could you do a guided
meditation with us?
>> Two minutes?
>> Sure.
>> So would you all put your
feet firmly on the ground.
Keep your hands in your lap.
Everything that we
call the environment
is actually our body.
If everything wasn't as
is in the solar system,
the Earth wouldn't
spin on its own axis,
and it wouldn't
go around the sun.
There would be no seasons.
So your biological
rhythms, circadian rhythms,
are the Earth spinning
on its own axis.
Your seasonal rhythms is the
Earth going around the sun.
And they're programmed
into your body.
If you disconnect from
your cosmic body--
because that's what the Earth
is, part of our cosmic body--
you, in a sense,
create the separation
that results in disruption
of your biological rhythms.
Everything linked from dis-ease,
discomfort, to inflammation,
starts with this disconnect.
Everything.
Now we know that if
somebody walks barefoot
on grass, or the
Earth, or on the beach,
at a very fundamental
level, basically,
the free radicals that
are built up in your body
as a result of stress
and inflammation,
they are neutralized.
But what is really happening
at a fundamental level
is you're restoring
your biological rhythms
and bringing them in alignment,
or you might say synchrony,
with the Earth, which is
connected to the entire cosmos.
And slowly open your eyes.
>> That was so cool.
Thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
>> I am so grateful for you.
>> The analogy would
be a good orchestra.
If they're all playing by
themselves, what you hear
is noise.
But if there's a
conductor, there's
a kind of a coherence,
entanglement
of these frequencies,
you hear music.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So there's a cosmic symphony
that is playing itself out
in your body right this moment.
Maybe you can't hear
the tune, but you're
dancing to it anyway.
>> If you take a microscope,
and you look at a piece of wood,
and you go down, down,
down, all of a sudden,
there's nothing there.
There's molecules, but
they're not even connected.
What's holding them together?
What's the force that's
holding everything together?
Electromagnetism.
Our body is electrical.
This is all
electronic equipment.
The heart, the
lungs, the brain--
this is electrical equipment.
It's all electrical.
Everything is electrical.
>> Can we measure the
effects reproducibly?
The answer to that is yes.
We now have 20 studies.
>> There's like, yeah,
20, 21 published studies
in the medical literature
on earthing and grounding.
And this is peer review stuff.
In simple terms,
what earthing does
is literally it squenches
the fires of inflammation.
And if inflammation is the
source of all root illnesses,
including Alzheimer's disease,
cancer, heart disease,
diabetes--
the list goes on and on.
If you can impact inflammation,
and squelch it, kill it,
stop it, we're going
to be healthier babies.
>> I didn't know
anything about grounding.
I had never heard of it at all.
But I became a new mom,
and I had my first child,
and she had colic, and she
cried, and cried, and cried.
First thing I did, being
a physician myself,
was take her to
the pediatrician.
And remember distinctly leaving
that pediatrician's office
with a knot in my stomach,
because the first thing
they told me is, it's
a baby, let them cry.
Literally, the
only time I noticed
that she wasn't in pain, and the
only time I could soothe her,
was when I was outside,
and I was barefoot,
and I had her in my arms.
And every time we were
outside, she relaxed.
I noticed if I did
use a stroller,
or if she was in a
car, she was still
in pain and uncomfortable.
This is not placebo effect.
She had no idea if I was
wearing shoes or not.
She doesn't know that.
I'm holding her either way.
And I just slowly
started realizing,
this child can only take
a nap and feel comfort
if she was on my skin,
held skin-to-skin,
and I was barefoot.
She'd be dead asleep, and
if I stepped in the house
and took both my feet off the
ground, she would wake back up,
and the pain response
would come back.
And I didn't know
what it was called,
and I didn't at that time
feel comfortable thinking
about using it in my
conventional medical practice.
But I just knew that
this is what I'm
going to do to help my child.
I was working with
a mentor of mine,
and she recommended
that I ground my energy.
I didn't know what she
meant by ground yourself,
so the first thing
I did was go home
and look it up on the internet.
And through doing a
search about grounding,
I found Clint Ober's work,
and the book about earthing.
And I realized that it's a
real thing and a real healing
modality with tons of
medical literature behind it.
The light switch went on.
And I thought, we're doing
things completely backwards
here.
A typical day for a child
is completely ungrounded.
Most children wake up, sleeping
on a bed that was not grounded,
in a house, or a building,
or on a floor that
was insulated from the Earth.
And then they go
immediately into a classroom
that's insulated.
And even on recess,
in the recess period,
they go outside and are
literally fenced in,
and they're paved
with asphalt. And then
they have after school
activities, which are either
indoors, or if
they're outdoors, they
are literally required
to wear protective gear.
And even if they're exercising
for two hours after school,
100% disconnected
from the Earth.
And then they go home, and they
go inside, and they eat dinner,
and they do homework
all hours of the night.
And then they pass out
in a ungrounded bed.
So that's a 24-hour period of
time completely ungrounded.
And that goes on day
after day after day.
>> I was at a retreat
weekend for a group of women.
It's called Inspire through
our National Association.
It's for teachers who don't
take care of themselves.
Teaching us how to.
The first day I got there,
and our leader said,
you need to go ground.
I'm like, O-- OK.
They grounded us.
And within that half hour, there
was no need for medication.
And I had been taking two
Motrin every four hours
for almost three weeks.
The district that
I am in already
actually has, with
Clint, a school
that has a grounding classroom.
One of the reasons that
the other teacher pushed
so hard to get
this room, she had
a group of students that had
significant behavior issues.
And they would rip
their shoes off
and go running out of the room.
And they went all over
campus looking for them.
They would always find them
in the planters by the trees.
>> But I had one teacher tell me
in a special ed class that they
had runners.
And what a runner is is
a kid who just runs out
of the classroom,
and they take off,
and everybody has to go
find where the student is.
I realized that these
kids who are the runners,
they're running out to the
far back corner of the school
campus.
And it's the only
place that has grass.
And they're sitting
down on the grass.
>> And so I went back, and I
talked to my special education
director.
And I said, can we try this?
Can we try this with some
of our students with autism?
I brought it into my room.
And I have a student with
autism, very severe autism.
He's completely nonverbal.
And it's a good day when
I can get this child
to sit for 10 seconds.
I pulled my mat out.
I cleaned it off.
And I took his socks and shoes
off, put his little feet on it.
That boy sat for seven minutes
straight and played with me.
He sat for seven
minutes straight.
So I took that back to my boss.
And that is something that
our school district is looking
into, is getting more
schools with classrooms
that have grounding in them.
>> I have heard stories from
teachers in classes where
their students are grounded
that they have half the level
of referrals for discipline.
Some students who were
in tears because they
were experiencing
success when before, they
were experiencing failure with
their behavior and discipline.
I've heard stories from
teachers with autistic children
who have been grounded,
where they have less of what
they call the meltdowns.
And the meltdowns are
less frequent and shorter,
and they come back
into the classroom,
and they're learning
more than they had
learned prior to the grounding.
>> How much of it is that
they're just so out of control
in their mind, and there's
so many things that they--
and these kids-- our
campus is concrete.
There's no place.
Even when they're in PE,
they've got tennis shoes on.
There's no place for
them to be grounded.
>> It's amazing what happens
not just with the teacher
at the front of the class,
but what can happen with
the student sitting
in the class.
And just think if
every single student
and every single teacher
in every single classroom
and every single school across
this whole world was grounded.
>> It turns out there's a reason
kids love to put their feet
on the ground.
And these guys
claim to know why.
>> Hey, my name is Finian.
>> I'm Lauren.
>> And my name is Ryland.
>> And we're Kiss the Ground.
>> And our mission is to
inspire participation in global
regeneration,
starting with soil.
>> We evolved very
connected to the soil,
with our feet in the soil,
our hands in the soil.
And what this means, when
you're connecting with it,
is just starting
to be discovered.
There are papers and
things in science
that are just very recent,
coming out, telling us
that actually, touching
soil is helping to make
your immune system stronger.
You can feel it.
When you're working in that
regenerative relationship
with nature, it feels different.
It changes lives.
>> And one of the biggest
sources of suffering in life is
the experience of
being disconnected.
And disconnected from what?
Nature.
And the basis of
nature is our soil.
>> The coolest thing
about connecting to soil
and the planet is it
really makes you happy.
It feels good.
And now we have science
that shows that it's
a cure for depression.
>> So which one of you was the
first one to discover earthing?
>> I'm going to
say it was Mariel.
She was born before me.
>> Oh, wow.
>> Yeah.
She got 18 months of
bare feet on the ground
before I even hit
the ground running.
>> That might be an insult.
>> Yeah, we actually went to
the track when we first got
together.
We went over to
Pepperdine University.
She hadn't run since--
well--
>> A long time.
>> Yeah.
And she's, I do yoga.
And I was like, well, we
need to go to the track.
We went to the track, and
we ran barefoot in the grass
for a couple of hours.
She loved it.
That was for fun.
>> That was for fun.
>> Yeah, we didn't
talk about grounding.
It was just something
that you do.
>> So we get up.
We watch sunrises.
And then we usually
go out for a hike.
I remember the first time, he
stopped, and he took his shoes.
He didn't say anything.
He took his shoes off.
Like, what are you doing?
And he just started walking
and didn't do anything.
And he also closed his eyes.
That was a whole other terror.
I came from a very
dysfunctional home.
I loved my family
tremendously, but there
was a lot of mental illness.
My grandfather, being one
of the greatest writers
of the 20th century, he suffered
tremendous mental health
issues.
He also took his life in 1961,
three months before I was born.
I lost a great grandfather,
two great grandfathers,
another great uncle, an uncle,
a cousin, and my own sister
took her life.
This house was filled
with people that
were tremendously tortured.
A lot of yelling.
There was a lot of drinking.
There was a lot of
self-medication.
There was a lot of craziness
that was happening.
To sort of survive was, for
me, getting out in nature,
just any time I
could be outside.
And I'd find myself lying on
the grass, or lying in a field,
or lying in a meadow, that
would make me feel better.
And then it wasn't
until I met Bobby
that I realized that what I was
instinctually doing actually
was a very real way to address
all kinds of inflammation.
Inflammation isn't
just physical.
There is neuro-inflammation.
That's brain inflammation.
Brain inflammation
causes depression,
causes all kinds of
serious problems.
This is a much bigger thing
than just walking barefoot
on the ground.
This is helping--
well, especially me--
helping me have a way
more balanced life.
My grandfather, you think
of great artists, some
of the greatest
writing that they do
comes from when they were at
some beautiful and specific
place, and their
description of it.
That comes from
an understanding,
from a connection to it.
To know that there
are solutions,
and they're solutions in nature.
And one of the biggest solutions
is that connection to nature.
And people forget that first.
It's sad because it
is so accessible,
and it is so real to
know that a grounded me,
Mariel, or a grounded
you, or anybody else,
is different than the
one who's not connected.
And that's what grounding does.
It pulls you into
you, to who you are.
>> I think it's
always the same thing.
It's the thing that your mom
said when you were a kid.
Go outside and play.
Go outside and get
some fresh air.
By the way, a lot of
grounding from this guy.
19 years old.
Look at the feet.
[LAUGH]
>> Yes.
>> That's one grounded
dog right there.
>> I first heard about
grounding, I want to say,
about seven years ago.
It immediately
changed my mindset
to appreciating the ground.
And then the history that we
used to all be on the ground,
and sleep on the ground,
and wear shoes that
were connected to
the ground, not
plasticised and disconnecting.
And I thought, OK, this
makes actually so much sense.
How have I not been able to
put that together before?
I've always loved nature.
I grew up in nature.
But the idea of actually
putting my feet on the ground
without shoes, it
felt always good,
but I didn't really
connect that it actually
could be good for my body.
Because I know we're
all electrical beings,
so we're constantly being
bombarded with everything
artificial and overstimulating.
And I feel really
sensitive to that.
If I'm working long hours,
and have this electrical mic
strapped on, acting,
and just being
around everything so electrical,
it starts to just exhaust me.
And I think we all get
so overstimulated by all
the electrification around us.
And I don't think it's
doing us any good.
>> Big girl.
>> Our bodies are constantly
being bombarded by everything
electrical in our lives.
And for me, I've learned that
in order to recalibrate my body,
I just need to put my feet
on the ground barefoot.
And it just sort of equalizes.
And I also think that when you
get intentional with putting
your feet on the ground, you
immediately steel yourself,
and you're able to just,
again, reconnect back
to nature, to the
simplicity of Mother Earth,
of this great, huge planet.
Because you're appreciating
what's under your feet.
It's a whole
symbiotic relationship
that we've disconnected
from in such big ways.
That just the simple act of
putting your feet on the ground
can give you so much, and so
much balance in your body,
and so much healing.
It's like we're sucking the
life energy through our feet
up our bodies, from our mama.
It's so bad.
I can't-- that's
really embarrassing.
It's hard because it's so
easy, and it's so simple.
People are like, really?
You're making a
big deal of that?
Intuitively, it 100% resonates.
And I'm raising my
daughter this way,
where I want her to be barefoot
outside as much as she can.
My husband likes being barefoot.
That's great.
I don't have to convince
him to take his shoes off.
Animals always barefoot.
And I know just bringing them
outside makes them happy.
So I'm just going
to keep doing that,
whether people want to
make fun of me or not.
Whatever you believe in,
when you're out in nature,
it feels bigger than
you, and it feels
like you have reverence
for what we have here.
>> I've always been climbing
mountains, running rivers,
always had a garden
wherever I live.
Lived in Hawaii and Alaska,
where I did naked gardening.
It was wonderful.
But once you're in a wheelchair,
all of that goes away.
I'm 58.
I was a singer, dancer,
actress for most of my career.
But then at age 36, I
woke up paralyzed one day
from this rare disease
called transverse myelitis.
It affects maybe 1 in
about 2 million people.
And when it first
happened to me,
they didn't know what it was.
And eventually,
they've come to realize
it has to do with inflammation,
and it's an immune dysfunction.
Your body attacking itself.
At the same time,
the doctors say,
well, we don't understand
it, and we don't really
know how to treat it, so
we'll just treat symptoms.
And for 21 years,
that's been my story.
My niece actually sent
me a grounding kit
about three years ago.
She knew that I
couldn't physically
in touch with the Earth anymore,
and she heard about this,
and she thought it'd be
the perfect thing for me.
So I received it.
And my first impression was,
OK, this makes no sense to me
at all.
But I don't want to hurt
my niece's feelings,
so I put it on
the end of the bed
and plugged it into the
socket as per my instructions.
And the first night, I
couldn't feel anything.
It didn't seem to
make any difference.
But when I woke up in the
morning, my feet, which
are always swollen,
first time I tried it,
there was no
swelling in my feet.
I could see the
bones in my feet,
and that hadn't happened
probably in six months.
I just made it part of my life.
After a couple years, it
suddenly occurred to me, gee,
everybody I know who's
in a wheelchair has
inflammation and swelling
issues along with pain.
So I called Marty and
said, let me tell you
about the Abilities Expo.
Would you guys consider
expanding your audience?
Dr. Clint thought it was a great
idea, and now they're here.
>> Natural phenomena, a
remarkable natural phenomena
that exists right
beneath our feet.
Earthing or grounding
is about connecting
to this natural resource.
And regardless of
your condition,
it can make you feel better.
Here's the background.
Throughout time,
throughout history, humans
were connected to the Earth.
We walked barefoot.
We slept on natural
animal hides.
We were connected to the Earth.
But today, it's a
different story.
We sleep in elevated beds.
We wear synthetic soled shoes.
And even our wheelchairs
are insulating us.
When we make direct contact
with the surface of the Earth,
our bodies receive--
10 years ago, I was working
with a holistic cardiologist,
and we wanted to do an
article on grounding.
And so he said to me, the
cardiologist, he said,
you've got to call Clint Ober.
And so I went, and
I called Clint Ober.
I spoke to him for five minutes.
And I realized this is not
an article, this is a book.
This is a huge discovery.
>> When I first heard about it,
I took it with a pinch of salt.
It sounded a little
too good to be true.
Having now experienced
several friends and people
in our team who
have used grounding,
the skepticism's
pretty much gone.
Right behind us right
now is one of my friends.
Her mom is in a companion chair.
15 minutes ago, she
was swollen legs.
Feet were cold.
Hands were cold.
And now they're not.
And this is her first
experience with grounding.
That's 15 minutes of
real life demonstration.
So I'm pretty much a convert.
>> I am 39 years old, trying
to take pride in that.
I was diagnosed with
MS 14 years ago.
The first time I heard about
grounding, I thought, get real.
This seems crazy.
My friend patched me
up, and I sat there.
And we all just talked
for about 45 minutes.
I found myself smiling, and that
wasn't something that I did.
I just didn't.
I physically have more energy.
I don't have the fatigue.
I feel like I really
can accomplish things.
I can brush my teeth now without
holding onto the counter.
My balance is better.
I just feel-- it sounds silly,
but I feel more grounded.
I feel like my feet are really
hanging onto the ground,
and I'm there.
I do it every night.
I sleep on a pad, and
I patch up my hands,
and sleep with a
grounding blanket.
And I just really am obsessive
because I'm noticing,
I just finally look
forward to tomorrow.
>> For the most part,
it's been sleep.
She's been able to
get through the night
without having to
get up six times
to go to the bathroom
or anything like that.
Her spasticity has
gotten a ton better.
She used to have
restless legs all night,
and that doesn't
really happen anymore.
It's been huge.
It's been a big
difference for her.
>> I want everybody to try this.
I don't want anybody
to not experience this.
Anybody who has pain, anybody
who can't sleep that well,
anybody who gets depressed.
These are all things
that have been completely
lifted out of my life.
I used to feel like a burden,
a real burden, to my husband,
to my family.
And I don't feel like
a burden anymore.
I feel-- I feel good,
and I feel like things
are going to get better.
It's my miracle.
>> Rawr.
As Athena began to
ground more and more,
we noticed a dramatic
shift in her health.
Athena, do you know
what grounding is?
>> Yes.
>> Yeah?
What is it?
>> It's when you put your feet
or your whole body on Mama
Earth, and she heals you.
>> That's right.
How does she heal you?
>> With her healing magic.
>> With her magic.
And have you been grounding?
>> Yes.
>> Yeah?
And what happened
as a result of that?
>> I didn't have to go to
the hospital in a whole year.
>> You haven't been to the
hospital in a whole year.
Amazing.
We're so happy about
that, aren't we?
You don't like the
hospital very much, do you?
When we began grounding Athena,
a very progressive doctor
had suggested I also try it.
He told me to lie
naked on the ground.
It sounded ridiculous.
But I did it anyway.
And then everything changed.
I began to sleep
through the night.
My energy level shifted.
And I got my libido back.
Over the next six months, I
kept practicing grounding,
and I lost 50 pounds.
I wasn't expecting any of this.
Hi, Clint.
I was just trying
to heal my daughter.
>> Hey, Rebecca.
How are you?
>> Thank you for
coming to visit us.
>> No problem.
I enjoyed it.
It's a beautiful drive today.
>> Yes.
>> Wow, look at you.
This is insane.
How did you do this?
>> There is this incredible
thing I need to tell you about.
I don't know if
you've heard about it,
but it's called grounding.
>> Oh.
>> Come on in.
>> All right.
>> Yeah.
It's great to have you here.
>> Good to be here.
>> Got to get those shoes off.
So the first thing I'm extremely
excited to share with you
is that our daughter has
not been to the emergency
room in many months now.
I can't tell you how
many nights at 2:00 AM,
we wound up in
the emergency room
because she couldn't breathe.
And now, she's
like any other kid.
She has a cold.
She has a normal cold.
She sleeps through the night.
What can you attribute that to?
>> Well, when children are
sick, and they get run down,
they don't get good sleep,
and they have inflammation
in their body.
She started grounding, and
she started sleeping better.
The grounding is reducing
the inflammation.
She's working with a
significantly improved
immune system.
It's called immunotherapy.
Get grounded and improve
your immune system.
>> So the surprise side effect
of grounding our daughter was I
got grounded.
>> Right.
>> And as you can see, I've
had a complete transformation.
Can you explain
what happened to me?
>> Yes.
As soon as you get grounded,
the first thing that happens,
you quiet the sympathetic
nervous system.
And then eventually, the
adrenals will start to recover.
But when your adrenals
becomes exhausted
because of too much
stimulation here, then
the sympathetic
overdrives, and then you
end up with adrenal fatigue.
And that is the precursor
to most all of these things,
including weight gain.
>> I never would have believed
that you and I would be sitting
here, having this conversation,
not in a million years.
Have other women reported weight
loss as a result of grounding?
>> Yes.
Not to the point
that I could come out
and say, well, get grounded,
you're going to lose weight.
It starts up here.
It starts getting the
pain out of your body,
getting the stress, the
anxiety, the irritability,
the depression, out of the body.
And then all of a sudden,
the right hormones
start to surface.
Your energy comes up.
Metabolism comes up.
Health is not something
we really have to work on.
We have to let it be.
We have to take the things
that are interfering
with our health, that are
compromising our immune system,
and remove them from our
life, and then the body
will go back to normal.
>> So why hasn't it
caught on in mainstream?
I can only say it will.
There's a well-established,
traditional, conventional
system that relies on
expensive intervention.
So they'd like to
perpetuate that.
And they're not too
interested in having
some competition
coming in for a lot
less expensive to sabotage
their profit levels.
Because their goal
isn't to help humanity.
Their goal, really,
as corporations,
is increase their profits.
The question becomes,
how much of an influence
has lack of grounding been
in the epidemic of disease
that we have?
Is this grounding a factor?
>> We have a pain epidemic,
which has led to an opiate
epidemic.
It's a national crisis.
So given the worldwide
discomfort, unhealth, diseases,
all of them are
benefited by earthing.
>> There's a resistance to
integrating novel thoughts.
And many times, new
ideas aren't implemented
until the people who hold
the counter opinion die.
>> There are lots of people
who don't want this to happen.
I don't know why people
critique it to death.
I don't know why they do that.
What the skeptics need
to do is try it out.
>> The good thing about
grounding is that you
don't need a doctor
to tell you to do it.
You do not need a physician
to recommend it to you.
You can try this any time.
It is your birthright because
you live on the Earth.
>> I ground every day.
Hey, I want to be connected
to the Earth as much as I can.
>> I would say about 95%
of the day, I'm grounded,
because I believe it's
just a no-brainer.
>> Go outdoors,
take your shoes off,
stand barefoot on the
Earth, or sit on the Earth,
put your feet and your
hands on the Earth,
and you will instantly notice
the pain and inflammation begin
to drain from your body.
"I got my life back" is
probably the most common refrain
that I hear.
Thank you.
I got my life back.
>> Even if the science isn't
yet considered mainstream,
there is an undeniable and
growing number of people who
are experiencing the
benefits of grounding.
As for us and our family, we're
spending more time outside
and spending more time together.
And yes, we're keeping our feet
firmly planted on the ground.
Does our daughter
still get sick?
Yeah, but not nearly as much.
Maybe she's growing out
of it, or maybe she's
just growing up grounded.
[MUSIC PLAYING]